---
title: A Good Neighborhood by Therese Ann Fowler
date: 2020-01-31
tags: [books]
thumbnail: ./cover.jpg
---
I received an ARC for review, but all opinions are my own. 

This is hands-down, the best book I’ve read so far in 2020! _A Good Neighborhood_ is incredibly well-written, engrossing, and absolutely heartbreaking at the end. I know I’m going to remember these characters for a long time. I have very high hopes for its success after it becomes available for purchase (Feb 4, 2020). 

In _A Good Neighborhood_, we meet Valerie Alston-Holt, a black widow who is raising her biracial son Xavier and preparing to send him off to college. He’s a musical prodigy who has a bright future ahead of him. Valerie is a professor of forestry and ecology, so it’s safe to say that trees are her life. When the Whitman family buys the lot next to her house and clears the land of all its trees to build their new home and pool, she’s rightfully upset. She grieves not only for all the trees lost on their property, but also for the giant oak tree on her own property. See, Brad Whitman has connections in the local government that allowed his builders to cut corners and put in a massive pool that ended up damaging her tree’s root system. 

Brad on the other hand, is NOT for the environment at all. He comes from a poor background, but made his money through an innovative invention in the air conditioning/heating field. To him, his mansion and other flashy purchases are all reflections of his success and his ability to provide for his small family. He moves in to the neighborhood with his wife Julia, step-daughter Juniper, and daughter Lily. (This distinction between daughter and step-daughter is one that Brad makes multiple times throughout the book for nefarious and disgusting reasons 👀).

Despite attempts to be friendly with her neighbors, Valerie could not stand back and allow the Whitmans (and other people like them) to use their wealth to get what they want without considering the consequences. She meets with a lawyer, who advises her that they could sue Whitman’s building company for $500,000 ([tree law is no joke](https://www.atlasobscura.com/articles/tree-law-is-a-gnarly-twisted-branch-of-the-legal-system)). 

>Place, especially in stories of the South, is as much a character as any human, and inseparable from — in this case even necessary to — the plot
>
>A Good Neighborhood, p13

While all of this is going on, the Whitmans are just settling in. They are a white, Christian family who believes in chastity until marriage. One year ago, Juniper attended a purity ball, after which Brad took on a more _possessive_ role in “guarding” her. Of course, Juniper is teased about this in school, but she doesn’t let it bother her too much. Juniper wants to study zoology, so she tells herself that she’s too busy to date anyway because she has to work hard to graduate high school early and get accepted into good colleges. Xavier is in the same boat — he’s been accepted into the college of his dreams, but he works hard every day to practice guitar and keep improving. Maybe this aversion to dating is what brought these two togehter. They date in secret for a short while knowing that Xavier will have to go away to college soon. Juniper keeps their relationship a secret from her parents, who would have disappproved because of her chastity vow and Xavier’s race (and of course, the half-million dollar lawsuit between their families).

It’s after this point that things take a dramatic turn. I don’t want to spoil anything, but I’ll say that the ending is a sad roller coaster of a read that unfortunately is all too real. My heart breaks for all the characters who fell victim to Brad and I’m disappointed that he didn’t get what I felt he deserved.

I say this about most of the books I review here, but if there’s one book you should actually read, it’s this one. I doubt that any of you who read it will end up disliking it — it’s that good. I do have to mention the writing style however, because it might be polarizing for some. This book is written in third person with an omnipotent narrator. I liked this because I felt it was done well, but some readers might not.

_A Good Neighborhood_ is timely in it’s discussion of race and the politics surrounding it, especially when contained in a close-knit neighborhood. It’s also timely because of the recent news about Jeanine Cummins, the very, very white author of _American Dirt_. In case you haven’t heard, _American Dirt_ is a story about a Mexican woman who escapes her old life and comes to America as an undocumented immigrant. I haven’t read it yet, but this book was initially so well-received that it was endorsed by Oprah and other celebrities. More recently, people have expressed their outrage in how a white woman can even take on such a topic. How can someone who has never been in the shoes of an undocumented immigrant even begin to show others what that is like? Especially in today’s political climate! More recent reviews are putting _American Dirt_ in the category of trauma-porn, for those who want to read about horrific experiences knowing that they will never go through any of it themselves. People have also uncovered that Cummins misrepresented herself in the way she portrayed her relation to this topic. While Cummins admits that she is not the _best_ person to tell such a story (going so far as to say “I wish someone slightly browner than me would write it”), she really played up the fact that her husband was an undocumented immigrant. What she left out, was that her husband is from Ireland, so the immigration experience is not at all comparable to what Mexicans go through. She also left out that there are so many Mexican authors who have already written about this topic, but I digress. This story is still developing, but as of now, Cummins’ book tour has been cancelled due to safety concerns (_sure, that’s the reason_). I’m curious to see how that will play out and whether this issue will impact the release of _A Good Neighborhood_ next week. In the acknowledgments, Fowler writes that she tried to be extremely mindful of the fact that she is a white woman writing about black characters. She cites a talk by Zadie Smith, where Smith said authors should write about whatever they want and if it’s something they have no experience with, then they should do as much research as possible. It might be worth mentioning that Sandra Cisneros (Mexican American LEGEND) praised _American Dirt_, calling it a masterful novel. Some people see books like this as a sort of bridge for white readers to get a glimpse into non-white experiences and learn things they would have never considered. What do you think? I am neither black nor white, so I can’t say whether Fowler succeeded in her representations, but I’m curious to hear your thoughts.

To learn more about Therese Anne Fowler and get your own copy of A Good Neighborhood, visit [her website](https://thereseannefowler.wordpress.com/).